Added Explaination on Data Model (#8)
icure/medtech-docs: sdks/explanations/data-model/data-model-healthcare-professional.md

---
slug: healthcare-professional
tags:
    - data model
    - data owner
    - healthcare professional
---
# Healthcare Professional

A Healthcare Professional is an actor that can manage and is responsible for Patients, Medical Devices and other 
Healthcare Professionals.  

> As a [Data Owner](/sdks/glossary#data-owner) they can create medical information and share them with other Data Owners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As [Data Owners](/sdks/glossary#data-owner) they can create medical information and share it with other Data Owners.
```

Other Data Owner can decide to share their medical information with them.

> ## When to Use a Healthcare Professional?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## When Should I Use a Healthcare Professional?
```

> You should use a Healthcare Professional when you need to represent a Doctor, or another actor responsible for patients,
> medical data and treatments, in your application.

Reviewer: Oxford comma?
```suggestion
You should use a Healthcare Professional when you need to represent a Doctor, or another actor responsible for patients,
medical data, and treatments, in your application.
```

> ## How a Healthcare Professional is Related to Other Entities?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How is a Healthcare Professional Related to Other Entities?
```

> A Healthcare Professional can create Users for other Patients, Medical Devices, and Healthcare Professionals.  
> A Healthcare Professional can manage other Users, by changing their passwords or deactivating them.  
> A Healthcare Professional can create Data Samples and Healthcare Elements for Patients.  
> A Healthcare Professional can share Data Samples and Healthcare Elements with other Data Owners.  
> A Healthcare Professional can create Notifications and can update the ones shared with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Healthcare Professional can:
- create Users for other Patients, Medical Devices, and Healthcare Professionals.  
- manage other Users, by changing their passwords or deactivating them.  
- create Data Samples and Healthcare Elements for Patients.  
- share Data Samples and Healthcare Elements with other Data Owners.  
- create Notifications and  update the ones shared with them.
```

## Examples

### A Doctor Inviting a Patient

> A Doctor (Healthcare Professional) visits for the first time a Patient. After the visit, it invites them to the iCure
> platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Doctor (Healthcare Professional) visits for the first time a Patient. After the visit, they invite the patient
to the iCure platform.
```

            })},
        codes: new Set([
            new CodingReference({
                id: 'SNOMEDCT|84229001|20020131',
                type: 'SNOMEDCT',
                code: '84229001',
                version: '20020131'
            })
        ]),
        healthcareElementIds: new Set([healthcareElement.id])
    })
)
```

After that, the Doctor checks if there are new Notifications from the Patient and shares the data with them.

<!-- file://code-samples/explanation/doctor-shares-data-with-patient/index.mts snippet:doctor receives notification-->
```typescript
const newNotifications = await api.notificationApi.getPendingNotifications();
const newPatientNotifications = newNotifications.filter( notification => notification.type === NotificationTypeEnum.OTHER && notification.responsible === patientUser.patientId);

if (!!newPatientNotifications && newPatientNotifications.length > 0) {
    await api.healthcareElementApi.giveAccessTo(healthcareElement, patient.id)
    await api.dataSampleApi.giveAccessTo(dataSample, patient.id)
    await api.notificationApi.updateNotificationStatus(newPatientNotifications[0], "completed")
}
```

### A Doctor Updating the Status of a Patient

> A Doctor (Healthcare Professional) discovers that their Patient is pregnant. Therefore, it updates her condition in the
> application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Doctor (Healthcare Professional) discovers that their Patient is pregnant. Therefore, they update her condition in the
application.
```
